# 4 - Signal - Goroutine Manager

- **Feature Name**: Signal - Goroutine Manager
- **Status**: Complete
- **Start Date**: 2022-06-23
- **Authors**: Emiliano Bonilla

# 0 - Summary

In this RFC I propose a framework for managing collections of goroutines in a CSP based
system. Virtually all of Delta's queries are served using a collection of long-lived
streams. Multiple goroutines inject values into, transform values through, and extract
values from these streams. Defining constructs for controlling and observing the
lifecycle of these routines is essential mitigating complexity and maintaining high
availability across the Delta cluster.

# 1 - Vocabulary and Abbreviations

- **GR** - goroutine
- **CSP** - Communicating Sequential Processes

# 2 - Motivation

The Go language provides several primitives for managing the lifecycle of a goroutine.
`sync.WaitGroup` and `errgroup.Group` prevent a goroutine from exiting until all of its
dependent routines have exited. `context.Context`and `context.CancelFunc` allow a GR to
exit when a request/process is completed or aborted. Separating these two constructs is
useful for abstraction and modularity, but can result in the misuse of context
variables, leading to leaky goroutines and unpredictable concurrency. We need an
effective way to combine these two systems in a way that doesn't tarnish their
semantics.

A key challenge in designing a solution is guaranteeing its applicability across both
request and application scopes. Request scoped routines process values related to a
single request, while application scoped routines process values related to several
requests or application internal functionality.

These two scopes require wildly different lifecycle management. Request scoped GRs must
be able to exit when a request is complete, aborted, or an error occurs. On the other
hand, application scoped GRs _cannot_ exit when a fatal error occurs for a particular
request, as other requests in the application may still be valid.

I'd like to propose a new definition called a _transient_ error. In the case of a
request scoped GR, a transient error is one that may prevent a particular value from
being processed, but is _not_ fatal to the request or application. In the application
scope, a transient error may be fatal to a request but not to the application.
Communicating transient errors back to the issuer of a request or the observer of the
application is essential.

# 3 - Design

This isn't a new problem, and many systems have written various ways of alleviating the
challenges of managing goroutines. Signal is not attempting to reinvent the wheel, but
rather to draw inspiration from battle tested solutions, albeit with a few modifications
to serve Delta's needs.

CockroachDB's
[ctxgroup](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/pkg/util/ctxgroup)
package merges `errgroup.Group` and `context.Context` into a single type
`ctxgroup.Group` that injects a context into each goroutine associated with a particular
request, as opposed to asking the caller to provide one explicitly. This is a simple way
to clearly link goroutines to a request and prevent context misuse.

An alternative is their
[stopper](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/pkg/cli/start.go) package
that was written before the addition of the `context` package to the standard library in
Go 1.7. It fills a similar role, but uses channels to send shutdown signals to GRs. It
also adds tracing, panic recovery, deferrals, and leak detection.

The `signal` package's core `Context` type essentially modernizes `stopper` by merging
it with `ctxgroup.Group`.

## 1 - Grouping Routines

The `Context` type provides a simple interface for forking a new routine.

```go
type Go interface {
Go(f func (ctx Context) error, opts ...GoOption)
}
```

It's the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the routine exits when the injected
context is canceled. If a routine exits with a non-nil error the context is canceled,
signaling other routines to exit. This behavior matches `errgroup.Group` and is a useful
feature for managing goroutines that depend on each other.

The `Go` method can also receive a list of options. These include parameters for adding
conditional deferrals, tracing, panic recovery, etc. The goal of these options is to
allow the caller to modify the behavior of the routine without having to modify the
definition of `f`. This is particularly useful for handling functions that can operate
both within an application and request scope.

## 2 - Waiting for Routines to Exit

The `Context` type provides an interface that extends the methods from `sync.WaitGroup`:

```go
type WaitGroup interface {
Wait() error
Stopped() <-chan struct{}
}
```

Wait implements the same semantics as `sync.WaitGroup.Wait`. `Stopped` returns a channel
that is closed when all routines have exited.

## 3 - Transient Errors

The `Context` type provides an interface called `Errors` that can be used to send
transient errors back to the caller:

```go
type Errors interface {
Transient() chan error
}
```

This is a rudimentary implementation, and essentially provides the same functionality as
passing an error channel around. The important element here is to define a standard
interface for handling transient errors, that way we don't end up with a bunch of
strange implementations that are difficult to read and link.
