# 6 - Freighter - Modular Transport Abstraction

- **Feature Name** - Freighter - Modular Transport Abstraction
- **Status** - Complete
- **Start Date** - 2022-08-09
- **Authors** - Emiliano Bonilla

# 0 - Summary

In this RFC I propose a design for a protocol agnostic transport abstraction that can be
used for both internal and client communications in a Delta cluster. The new package,
named `freighter`, provides generic unary and streaming interfaces for exchanging
messages between a client and server. These interfaces can be implemented by a variety
of languages and protocols (gRPC, Websocket, WebRTC, HTTP).

Freighter also defines standards for communicating errors between services, allowing
exceptions to be communicated in a meaningful manner.

# 1 - Motivation

We're currently using the `x/transport` package to abstract away gRPC implementation
details for node internal communications. Both Delta's distribution layer and our Aspen
key-value store make use of this package with success. It provides a crucial separation
between core application logic and networking details, allowing us to swap out different
protocols, and test our application using mock networks (see `x/transport/tmock`).
Unfortunately, the `x/transport` package defines no standards for cross-language
communication, and focuses its implementation on the gRPC protocol.

As we develop client libraries in Python, Rust, and TypeScript, we need to extend these
transport standards to support other languages and protocols (such as Websockets for the
browser).

These extensions should not only include definitions for how a client and server should
behave when exchanging messages, but also how some of these messages should be
structured. This is particularly import for exceptions, as it's critical to communicate
errors in a meaningful manner (such as displaying help text when a user enters invalid
data in a form).

# 2 - Design

At its core, Freighter defines two behavioral interfaces for exchanging messages a
client and a server. The unary interface defines a simple request-response cycle, while
the streaming interface enables performant asynchronous communication over long periods
of time. While I describe them using go idioms, these interfaces can be implemented in
many languages.

## 1 - Behavioral Interface - Unary

The unary interface describes a single request-response cycle between a client and a
server.

### 1 - Client

A client can send a payload to a server and receive a response using a `send` method
with the following signature:

`send(target, requestPayload) (responsePayload, error)`

`target` is the endpoint to send the payload to. An endpoint doesn't have to be a full
address. A client library, for example, may only require the caller to pass in an
endpoint ("/api/v1/foo"). Cluster communications, on the other hand, may require a
host:port pair ("172.16.245.1:8080"). The transport implementation can handle the
construction of a full route or address internally (gRPC's service registry for
example). Target syntax is defined by the transport implementation.

`requestPayload` is the payload to send to the server. This payload encapsulates all
parameters necessary to execute the request (aside from the target, of course).

`responsePayload` is the payload returned by the server after executing the request.

The encoding of the payloads is left to the transport implementation.

`error` is an error that occurs while executing the request. This error can be a client
side validation error, a network failure, or an error returned by the server. Returning
an error as a value resembles the go pattern for error handling, and some languages
typically raise exceptions instead of returning them. Clients and servers may use this
error for control flow (such as displaying a message to the user), so I'm encouraging
implementations to return errors as values. This allows the caller to parse the error as
a data structure, and make a decision whether to raise an exception, retry the request,
or do something else. Using errors for control flow becomes particularly important when
defining a streaming interface. More details on error handling to follow.

### 2 - Server

A server can receive a payload from a client by binding a handler to the transport's
`bindHandler` method.

`bindHandler(handler(requestPayload) (responsePayload, error))`

`handler` receives a payload, processes it, and returns a response to the client. If the
server encounters an error during processing, it can return a non-nil error, which the
transport will encode and return to the client.

## 2 - Behavioral Interface - Streaming

The streaming interface enables non-blocking bidirectional communication between a
client and a server. Streaming interface is complex, requiring delicate control flow.
Unary communication should be preferred in cases where performance and asynchronicity
are not essential.

### 1 - Client

Streaming starts with a client issuing a `stream` request to a particular target:

`stream(target) (stream, error)`

Instead of issuing a request, `stream` returns a type that can be used to send and
receive payloads. `stream` returns an error when the transport cannot reach the target
or fails to assemble the stream networking infrastructure.

The client-side `stream` provides three methods for communication:

`send(requestPayload) error` - Sends a payload to the server. Send is non-blocking, so
delivery of the payload is not guaranteed, as the stream may close before all payloads
have been exchanged. Send returns an error when:

1. The server closes the stream -> Returns an `EOF` (end-of-file) error letting the
   caller know that the server is no longer accepting messages. If the server closes the
   stream with an abnormal error, send will still return an `EOF` error. The client can
   discover the error the server closed the stream with by calling `receive`.

2. The client calls `closeSend` -> Returns a `StreamClosed` error letting the caller
   know that the client is no longer accepting messages. This case represents a bug in
   the application, and listening for a `StreamClosed` error should not be used for
   control flow.

3. The transport implementation fails -> Returns the error that caused the transport to
   fail.

`receive() (responsePayload, error)` - Blocks until a payload is received from the
server or the stream closes. Receive returns an error when:

1. The server closes stream nominally (i.e. returns a nil error from the handler) ->
   Returns an `EOF` error letting the caller know that the server is no longer
   exchanging messages.

2. The server closes the stream abnormally (returns a non-nil error) -> Returns the
   error that caused the stream to close.

3. The transport implementation fails -> Returns the error that caused the transport
4. to fail.

`closeSend() error` - Closes the sending direction of the stream, letting the server
know the client will no issue new payloads. `closeSend` is idempotent, and will only
return an error if the underlying transport implementation fails.

It's important to note that `closeSend` is purely for flow-control, and has no impact on
the receiving direction of the stream. In most cases, clients should wait for `receive`
to return a non-nil error to ensure they have received all relevant payloads.

### 2 - Server

A server can bind a handler to the streaming transport using a `bindHandler` function:

`bindHandler(handler(stream) error)`

`handler` provides a stream that can communicate with the client using `send` and
`receive` methods:

`receive() (requestPayload, error)` - Blocks until a payload is received from the
client. Returns an error when:

1. The client calls `closeSend` -> Returns an `EOF` error letting the server know it
   should process remaining payloads and then close the stream.

2. The handler returns -> Returns a `StreamClosed` error letting the server know the
   receiving direction of the stream is no longer accepting messages. This case
   typically represent a bug in the application, and listening for a `StreamClosed`
   error should not be used for control flow.

3. The transport implementation fails -> Returns the error that caused the transport to
   fail.

`send(responsePayload) error`: Sends a payload to the server. As with client streams,
`send` does not block, so delivery is not guaranteed. `send` returns an error when:

1. The handler has returned -> Returns a `StreamClosed` error letting the server know
   the sending direction of the stream is no longer accepting messages. As with
   `receive`, this case typically represents a bug in the application, and listening for
   a `StreamClosed` error should not be used for control flow.

2. If the transport implementation fails -> Returns the error that caused the transport
   to fail.

Unlike a client stream, a server stream has no `closeSend` a method. Instead, the caller
can close the stream by returning an error from the handler. If the error is nil, the
client will receive an `EOF` error. If the error is non-nil, the transport
implementation encodes the error and returns it to the client.

### 3 - Typical Lifecycle

To better understand the lifecycle of a streaming request, let's look at a simple
example where a client sends a stream of integers to a server, the server squares each
integer, and then returns the result.

1. Client calls `stream` with the server's address and receives a client stream to
   exchange payloads with.
2. Server opens a new handler and provides it with a client stream to exchange payloads
   with.
3. Client sends the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4 to the server.
4. Client calls `closeSend` to indicate that it has no more integers to send.
5. Server receives each integer, squares it, and sends the result to the client. After
   receiving an `EOF` error, the server exits a loop and returns a nil error to the
   handler.
6. Client receives payloads in a loop until it receives an `EOF` error, indicating the
   end of communication.

That's it!
