# 15 - Signals

**Feature Name**: Signals <br />
**Start Date**: 2023-10-16 <br />
**Authors**: Emiliano Bonilla <br />
**Status** Complete <br />

# 0 - Summary

In this RFC I propose a design for capturing and communicating changes to a cluster's
data store using a mechanism called _signals_. As our user's look to automate more
processes in analysis, hardware configuration, and control, providing the ability
to observe changes to cluster meta-data is crucial. Signals leverage the same channel-based
communication mechanism that is used for real-time movement of telemetry. While not
exclusively reversed for meta-data changes, the most common use case is to observe
changes to Aspen's gossip-based key-value pipeline.

# 1 - Vocabulary

**Sample** - An arbitrary byte array recorded at a specific point in time. Typically,
an event or reading of a sensor or actuator. <br />
**Channel** - A logical collection of samples across a time range. Most often emitted
by a single source. <br />
**Virtual** - Not persisted to disk - usually a channel. <br />
**Free Channel** - A channel that has no leaseholder and is virtual. Non-leased virtual
channels represent events or signals that can be emitted by any node in the
cluster. <br />

# 2 - Motivation

The need for a change data capture mechanism is driven by the desire to automate processes
such as analysis and hardware configuration. For example, a user may create a range using
a Python based control sequence. Another user may want to listen to the creation of that
range to fire off a separate analysis process to produce a post-test report.

Another example is the ability to listen to changes in the configuration of a data acquisition
task. As a user changes parameters in a task (sample rates, ports, calibration values, etc.),
a separate process may want to listen to those changes and update the configuration of the
DAQ in order to maintain a consistent state.

# 3 - Design



