# 24 - Real-Time Task Pre-Scheduling

**Feature Name**: Real-Time Task Pre-Scheduling
**Status**: In-Progress

# 0 - Summary

A key limitation of an network-based supervisory control system like Synnax is it's
inability to guarantee a maximum latency for command execution. Our Python-base control
sequence system is not real-time, and requires several network jumps to actually execute
instructions on the underlying hardware. This can lead to unpredictable delays in command
execution, which is unacceptable for certain applications.

This RFC proposes a solution to this problem by enabling certain Synnax drivers to run on
a soft real-time operating system (RTOS). Execution on an RTOS will allow us to guarantee
a maximum latency for command execution.

# 1 - Motivation

The current version of Synnax is excellent for orchestrating high level tasks across
a number of heterogeneous devices across multiple network nodes. However, it is limited
in its ability to execute hardware commands with precision. While we can guarantee
P99 latency values within constrained networks, several of our current and potential
customers require a more deterministic system.

Precise command scheduling has critical use-cases across industries. In Aerospace,
precise valve timings can mean the difference between a successful engine firing and
a catastrophic failure. In Manufacturing, precise robot arm movements can mean the
difference between a successful assembly and a costly defect.

# 2 - Design

# 3 - Benchmarking

To quantify the improvement in latency, we'll create a sequence of commands to control
the digital outputs in an NI-CDAQ 9174 chassis. We'll communicate with the chassis using
an Ubuntu 24.04 machine running the modified Synnax driver. Full machine specs are as follows:

- CPU: Intel Core i7-8700K
- RAM: 16GB
- OS: Ubuntu 24.04
- Kernel: 5.4.0-42-generic

We'll run the system in two configurations: one with the Synnax driver using C++ threads
without explicit scheduling, and one with the Synnax driver running on an RTOS. We'll
measure the time it takes to execute each sequence of commands, and compare the results.
