# 1 - Metadata and Configuration Handling

**Feature Name** - Metadata Handling <br />
**Status** - Released <br />
**Start Date** - 2023-04-28 <br />
**Authors** - Emiliano Bonilla <br />

# 0 - Summary

Now that we have a grip on telemetry storage, our users are asking about linking
non-time series information to their time-series data. This metadata ranges from simple
alphanumeric key-value pairs to procedure documents and simulation results. This PRD
consolidates these requests into a set of requirements and proposes a strategy
delivering this functionality.

# 1 - Problem Statement

Providing efficient, meaningful access to hardware data is a core part of Synnax's
vision for an industrial operations platform. Without providing essential context about
the large amounts of telemetry we collect, we hamper our user's ability to quickly form
analysis and understand the systems they control. As of today, our users have
no way of linking metadata to time-series data, and must manually refer to this
information in external systems such as Excel, Google Sheets, or configuration files
in a git repository. They must also manually access the data by time-range as opposed
to by label. This has been a major pain point in the alpha version of Synnax, and
querying by metadata has become one of the most requested, and most needed features.

## 1.0 - What is Metadata?

Time-series data (or telemetry) represents the values of a particular sensor, actuator,
or event source over time. In Synnax's case, Meta represents correlated information
about a particular group of time-series values. Metadata is related to telemetry by both
time and space i.e. _this piece of metadata relates to the telemetry we recorded between
1 and 2pm on June 14, 2023, for the channels X,Y, and Z_. The term "metadata" is quite
broad, so here are a few specific examples:

- Hardware configuration, such as part numbers, design version, and instrumentation
  diagrams.
- Test/operation procedures and notes.
- Test parameters such as volumes, masses, pressure and voltage set-points.
- Test personnel.
- Labels on interesting regions of data.

# 2 - User Research Summary

User research is the driving force behind this strategy. All of our user research can be
found [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/13Vc-G5CNzCwhxx9vNsHJLECK9Mrqz0if).
As this is a public document, we've anonymized and summarized our findings below.

## 2.0 - It's painful to query by time range

Our users frequently complain that having to request data by specific time ranges is
one of the main pain points that deters them from using Synnax over a locally stored
file. In order to access relevant data, they must reference test logs, chat messages,
or other information sources to figure out when an operation was run. In many cases,
they have to start with a very broad guess and slowly refine their search, a painstaking
task. Our users want to name specific test or operations and be able to search for and
load them in by name.

## 2.1 - Permanent channel names don't work

Dynamic, fast-paced teams are constantly evolving their hardware systems, experimenting
with new sensor configurations, adding actuators and swapping out components.
Permanently setting a channel name doesn't make sense in these scenarios. During one
test your channel may be plugged into a vent valve and in another a propellant valve.
Using a generic name like `daq1-valve1` makes it difficult to figure out which channel
represents what physical entity/behavior. Our users want some way to dynamically alter
what a particular channel represents.

## 2.2 - Users are keeping metadata elsewhere

Our users are keeping critical information in:

- Physical notebooks
- Shared drives
- Excel sheets
- Chat messages
- In their heads
- Git repositories

In most cases, they choose particular tools for specific reasons, and are satisfied
with the functionality those tools provide. The issue is not the lack of software for
defining metadata, but the inability to strongly tie this metadata to time-series data.

## 2.3 - Metadata is difficult to keep up to date

In most teams, particularly small ones, maintaining accurate accounts of software and
hardware configuration and operational procedures is remarkably challenging. Keeping
these information sources current takes a considerable amount of discipline. This means
that metadata used in critical operations (such as auto-sequences) may be out of date.
We need to think about how we build fault tolerance surroundings ops critical metadata.

## 2.4 - Users want to query similar operations together

Synnax's query engine is designed for extremely fast time-range lookups. As discussed
in [2.0](#20---its-painful-to-query-by-time-range), this pattern needs augmentation. A
frequently requested feature is the ability to query similar operations together.
For example, a user may want to query all operation for a particular model number of
component, or operations that used a particular test procedure. An extension of this is
the ability to query operations by similar data i.e. all the operations that had a
particular pressure profile.

From a vision perspective, this request is one of the essential features that Synnax
can provide over a file system based approach.

## 2.5 - Metadata is important across industries

While the majority of Synnax's users are in aerospace, we've also taken the time to
interview users in other industries, and have found that metadata is a crucial part
of their workflow.

# 3 - Strategy

The strategy for adding metadata handling to Synnax involves three major experiments:
labeled ranges, synnax as a metadata integrator, and intelligent metadata.

## 3.0 - Experiment 1 - Labeled Ranges

### 3.0.0 - Hypothesis

The labeled range is the pivot around which metadata revolves and is the primary means
of querying time-series.

### 3.0.1 - Procedure

The experiment starts with implementing a new data structure in Synnax called the
labeled range. It has three fields:

```go
package ranger

type Range struct {
  Key uuid.UUID
  Label string
  TimeRange telem.TimeRange
}
```

This range allows a user to associate a particular region of the Synnax database with
a label. This in itself provides the majority of the functionality that our users
are looking for.

The next step is to implement a means for creating them. We'll accomplish this by
exposing a simple HTTP/2 API and adding utility methods to both our Python and
Typescript clients. We'll also implement a simple dialog in the Synnax UI.

Next, we need to add an intuitive method for accessing these ranges. We'll do this in
two major ways. The first is to add search functionality to both the Synnax UI and
the client libraries. The next step is to implement a new type called a `Range` that
wraps useful methods for querying data within the range. For example, we'll add a
`read` method:

```python
import synnax as sy

client = sy.Synnax()

r = client.ranges.search("COPV Pressure 1").latest()

data = r.read("Time", "Data")
```

This will allow our users to quickly access the underlying data associated with a range.

### 3.0.2 - Measurement

We'll measure the success of this experiment using two classes of user interviews. The
first is to interview those who have used the previous version of Synnax and were
frustrated with the need for explicit time range lookups. The second is to reach out
to a breadth of potential users in various industries and give them exercises for
accessing their data.

## 3.1 - Experiment 2 - Synnax is not a Primary Metadata Store

Hypothesis - Synnax should not serve as a primary means for most metadata, and should
instead allow users to link time-series to other metadata sources.

## 3.2 - Experiment 3 - Intelligent Meta data

Hypothesis - There exists targeted metadata that is broadly useful to the point where
it should be built directly into Synnax.

Procedure
Implement channel aliases
Implement channel units
