# 1 - Metadata and Configuration Handling

**Feature Name** - Metadata and Configuration Handling <br />
**Status** - Draft <br />
**Start Date** - 2023-04-28 <br />
**Authors** - Emiliano Bonilla <br />

# 0 - Summary

Now that we have a grip on time-series telemetry storage, our users are asking about
linking non-time series information to their time-series data. This meta-data ranges
from simple alphanumeric key-value pairs to procedure documents and simulation results.
This PRD consolidates these requests into a set of requirements and proposes a high level
design for providing this functionality.

# 1 - Problem Statement

Providing efficient, meaningful access to hardware data is a core part of Synnax's vision
for a hardware operations platform. Without providing essential context about the large
amounts of telemetry we collect, we hamper our user's ability to quickly perform analysis
and understand the systems they control. As of today, our users have no way of linking
metadata to time-series data, and must resort to storing this information in external
systems such as Excel, Google Sheets, or configuration files in a git repository.

# 2 - User Research Summary

User research is the driving force behind the design of this feature set. All of our
user research findings can be found [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/13Vc-G5CNzCwhxx9vNsHJLECK9Mrqz0if).
As this is a public document, we've anonymized and summarized our findings below.

## 2.0 - Alphanumeric Keys and Values

Alphanumeric values that are not time-series telemetry. Notable examples include:

- Hardware dimensions such as orifice diameters and tank capacities.
- Operational parameters such as fuel and oxidizer volumes, controller input parameters,
and various set-points.

## 2.1 - Software Configuration

Software configuration parameters and versions such as tying the commit hash of the
software version to a particular span of time.

## 2.2 - Simulation Results

Linking simulated to real-world operations.

## 2.3 - Labeled Time Ranges

Labeling time spans of data for later retrieval, as opposed to performing a fixed time
range query.

## 2.4 - Notes and Procedures

Many of our users follow carefully written and closely followed procedures when conducting
operations. Linking these procedures, and, eventually, perhaps even individual steps
within a procedure to a particular time stamp is a common request.
