# 2 - Control

**Feature Name**: Control <br />
**Status**: Draft <br />
**Start Date**: 2023-06-10 <br />
**Authors**: Emiliano Bonilla <br />

# 0 - Summary

Synnax is all about reducing the iteration time from acquiring data to making
operational decisions. We've built the foundation for the outgoing stream of data by
building a telemetry acquisition, storage, and analysis system. The benefits derived
from efficient analysis are hampered by an inability to use those results to make
decisions in a timely manner. By implementing a control system into Synnax, we enable
our users to process telemetry in real-time, and use that analysis to make effective
manual and automated decisions.

# 1 - Problem Statement

As of today, engineers would need to user separate control infrastructure, such as
LABVIEW or SCADA. Integrating separate control and data handling
systems is resource intensive, and, in many cases, very inefficient. Live telemetry from
the control system may take days to reach the hands of an analyst; operations engineers
often need to make changes in seconds. This leads to under-informed decisions, which has
negative consequences on both the efficiency of operations and hardware development,
and, in some cases, can lead to dangerous situations.

# 2 - User Research Summary

User research is the driving force behind the design of this feature set. All of our
user research findings can be
found [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/13Vc-G5CNzCwhxx9vNsHJLECK9Mrqz0if).
As this is a public document, we've anonymized and summarized our findings below.

## 2.0 - Implementing a new control system is difficult and risky

Hardware control systems have a different demands for reliability than other software.
They can control expensive, dangerous, and delicate equipment, where the cost of
hardware failure can be in the hundreds of millions of dollars or result in the loss of
human life. Naturally, developing new version of such systems is risky, making adoption
a difficult process.

As one user put it: "You should never think, 'I wish I hadn't automated this'". The most
important characteristic of current control systems is that they never prevent the user
from gaining manual control in a dangerous situation. While, in some situations, letting
the user take manual control can also be risky, with new control systems, it's
preferable to give authority to the operator over the software.

As infrastructure gets more expensive and/or dangerous to human life, the standards for
control software dramatically steepen. Certification processes and multimodular
redundancy become commonplace.

## 2.1 - Users want to do a lot of things at once

Even small hardware systems can have many processes; various automated analysis
scripts, conditional abort sequences, auto sequences, and manual control can coexist
to enable effective operations. These operations must concurrently interact with the
system in harmony, and exchange of control must be reliable.

These processes often require control authority at the channel level. For example, two
pressurization sequences for separate tanks must be able to command different valves at
the same time. In addition, processes like abort sequences must be able to seize control
at any time. Our users need an intuitive way of defining under what conditions a process
has control authority over a (specific region) of the system.

## 2.2 - Operations/test engineers want to implement auto sequences

Modern hardware operations are more cross-disciplinary than ever. Smaller, highly
interactive teams are doing more with less. Part of this transition involves
enabling test/operations engineers to write control sequences themselves. Traditional
control sequence development demands constant communication between the test engineers
who define what the steps should look like and software/instrumentation engineers who
know how to implement the sequence itself. Inefficiencies in this cycle mean that test
engineers are left waiting while software engineers are overwhelmed and cannot focus
on the core tasks at hand.

Enabling test engineers to write control sequences removes this inefficiency entirely;
both sides of the process are free to focus on other, more important areas of work. As
one control engineer puts it, "The more people that are knowledgeable about your system,
the less time your DCS engineers need to spend time making minor changes. Empowering
test engineers empowers controls engineers."

The primary challenge is developing a language simple and semantic enough that less
experience programmers can start developing with quickly.

## 2.3 - Users want access to metadata in their control sequences

Tests and operations have many parameters that users want to access within control
sequences. These include part numbers, dimensions, calibration tables, wiring lists,
etc. The challenge here is providing meaningful access to this information as it evolves
over time. How do we ensure that an auto-sequence that may be run across multiple
operations has access to the correct, specific version of a calibration table?

This is particularly relevant in the context of channel aliasing. Users want to be able
to write auto-sequences that access semantic actuator names (i.e. "fuel_tank_valve") as
opposed to generic channel names ("ec_valve_1"). In addition to making the code more
readable, instrumentation engineers can now swap out the locations of physical
actuators without breaking the control sequence.

In short, engineers want to command their systems under a specific context: a set of
parameters that define the configuration of the system at the time they operate it.
Certain artifacts, such as control sequences, must be transferable across contexts.

## 2.4 - There are multiple control paradigms

There are two general approaches to controlling hardware systems over the network:
supervisory and real-time. Supervisory control involves sending configuration and
trigger commands to other devices, which then execute real-time control. The most common
example is a PID controller, which takes in supervisory P,I,D parameters and is enabled
on command. Real-time control, on the other hand, involves sending specific actuator
set-points over the network. This is akin to sending the PID response over the network
instead of simply setting the parameters.

For more reading on the subject,
see [Real-Time Commands](../../tech/telemetry.md#32---real-time-commands)
and [Supervisory Commands](../../tech/telemetry.md#33---supervisory-commands).

Both of these paradigms typically coexist in a single system, and, as such, Synnax must
support both. These paradigms require both different implementations and interfaces.

## 2.5 - Organizations may want to use their own control systems

Synnax's most potent market risk is its cost of adoption (COA); many customers have
existing infrastructure in place, and a new platform is now worth adopting unless it
provides significant benefits and minimal cost. Part of our plan to reduce the COA is to
enable gradual adoption of Synnax's features. Control systems are difficult and risky
to replace. As such, the platform should be usable in its full capacity as a data
storage and streaming engine without needing to adopt it as a control system.

# 3 - Strategy
