This video will walk you through the process of installing and configuring the essential
components of Synnax. We'll start off by downloading the Console, which is our primary
user interface for interacting with a Synnax deployment. We can use it for tasks like  
visualizing real-time and historical telemetry, configuring data acquisition devices,
and manually controlling actuators. Once that's done, we'll move on to installing the
Cluster, which is the heart of every Synnax deployment. It's where all of our data is
stored, and it's the central junction for devices, control sequences, and operator
consoles. Let's get started.

I am on the Synnax documentation home page, which you can find at docs.synnaxlabs.com.
I'll hit this big button here to take me to the getting started guide, and then I'll
head to the installation page.

The first thing we'll see is a link to download the Console for our operating system.
I'm on Mac, although we also support Windows. Once that's ready, I'll drag it into my
applications folder, and then open Synnax from the dock.

Once the Console is open, we'll see a splash screen with the Synnax logo and a few
buttons. In order to make sure everything is up and running, we'll plot some demo data
from a cluster that our team has running in the cloud. I'll open up the dropdown in the
bottom right corner, and select the `Demo` cluster.

We'll see the connection status badge turn blue, indicating that everything is working
correctly. Now, we'll load up a workspace with some visualizations. Workspaces are a way
to organize the console layout for a given use case. We'll dive more into workspaces in
a later video, but for now, we'll just select the `Demo` workspace from the dropdown.

Once everything has loaded, we'll see a new plot appear with a live stream of data. This
is just a sine wave from a fake sensor, but it's a good introduction to what visualizing
data feels like in Synnax.

What we really want is to connect to our own hardware. To do that, we'll need to install
a local Synnax cluster. First things first, I'll clear the current workspace and
disconnect from the demo cluster.

Then I'll head back to the documentation site and scroll down to the installation
section. Just like the Console, the cluster is a single executable that you can install
and run on your operating system. If you prefer containers, we also have an image
available on Docker Hub.

Unlike the Console, the cluster requires us to use the command line to install it. If
you're unfamiliar with the terminal, don't worry. These commands are very simple, and
I'll walk you through them step by step.

I'll start off by showing you how to install the cluster on Mac and Linux. If you're on
Windows, feel free to jump forwards.

I'll open up my terminal, and copy the first command from the documentation. This will
download the latest version of the cluster. I'll use `sudo chmod +x ./synnax` to make
the file executable, and then run "./synnax version" to verify the install worked
correctly.

We recommend moving the binary into a more permanent location on your machine, and then
adding that directory to your PATH environment variable. If you're unfamiliar with a
PATH variable, it's just a list of directories that your machine uses to look up
available commands.

I'll move the binary into `/usr/local/bin`, renaming it to `synnax` to match the command
name. Then, I'll add that directory to my PATH using the
`export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/bin` command.

Now, I'll run `synnax version` again to verify that the install worked correctly.
